README.md, before:

<img align="left" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17532220/213287034-0209aa19-f8a1-418f-a325-7472510542cb.png" width="150" height="150"/>
<br>

# AMPEL-HU-astro
<br><br>


Contributed Ampel units from HU/DESY group
==========================================

## Installing

1. [Install poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation). If you install poetry with conda, be sure to install it in its own environment, e.g. `conda create -n poetry`.
2. `git clone https://github.com/AmpelProject/Ampel-HU-astro.git; cd Ampel-HU-astro`
3. Check your virtualenv setup with `poetry env info` (or `conda run -n poetry poetry env info` if using conda). The output should include:
   ```
   Virtualenv
   Python:         3.10.x
   ```
   If not, point poetry at an installation of Python 3.10 with (`conda run -n poetry)` `poetry env use PATH_TO_PYTHON_310`
4. (`conda run -n poetry`) `poetry install -E "ztf sncosmo extcats notebook"`
5. `cd notebooks`
6. (`conda run -n poetry`) `poetry run jupyter notebook`

This will allow a number of Demo / access / development notebooks to be run. Note that most of them
requires an access token if data is to be retrieved.

## Provided units

<!-- The following are extracted from the docstrings; do not edit by hand -->
<!-- AUTOGENERATED CONTENT, do not edit below this line -->

### T0 units (alert filters):
- [LensedTransientFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/LensedTransientFilter.py)
- [PredetectionFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/PredetectionFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter.
- [RandFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RandFilter.py)
- [RcfFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RcfFilter.py): Filter for the ZTF Redshift Completeness Factor program..
- [RedshiftCatalogFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RedshiftCatalogFilter.py): Filter derived from DecentFilter designed to only accept transients located close to a galaxy in a catalog, and within redshift bounds.
- [SimpleDecentFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/SimpleDecentFilter.py): General-purpose filter devloped alongside DecentFilter but without use of external catalogs.
- [TransientInClusterFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/TransientInClusterFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter, in addition selecting candidates with position compatible with that of nearby galaxy clusters..
- [XShooterFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/XShooterFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter, in addition selecting very new transients which are visible from the South.

### T2 units (augment):
- [T2BayesianBlocks](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2BayesianBlocks.py): T2 unit for running a bayesian block search algorithm to highlight excess regions.
- [T2BrightSNProb](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2BrightSNProb.py): Derive a number of simple metrics describing the rise, peak and decline of a lc.
- [T2CatalogMatchLocal](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2CatalogMatchLocal.py): Cross matches the position of a transient to those of sources in a set of catalogs.
- [T2DigestRedshifts](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2DigestRedshifts.py): Compare potential matches from different T2 units providing redshifts.
- [T2DustEchoEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2DustEchoEval.py)
- [T2ElasticcRedshiftSampler](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2ElasticcRedshiftSampler.py): Parse the elasticc diaSource host information and returns a list of redshifts and weights.
- [T2ElasticcReport](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2ElasticcReport.py): Parse a series of T2 results from T2RunParsnip and T2XgbClassifier, and create combined classifications according to the taxonomy of https://github.com/LSSTDESC/elasticc/blob/main/taxonomy/taxonomy.ipynb.
- [T2FastDecliner](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2FastDecliner.py): Determine decline rate in two last obs.
- [T2GetLensSNParameters](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2GetLensSNParameters.py)
- [T2InfantCatalogEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2InfantCatalogEval.py): Evaluate whether a transient fulfills criteria for being a potentially infant (extragalactic) transient.
- [T2KilonovaEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2KilonovaEval.py): Evaluate whether a transient fulfills criteria for being a potential kilonova-like event.
- [T2KilonovaStats](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2KilonovaStats.py)
- [T2LCQuality](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LCQuality.py): determine the 'quality' of the light curve by computing ratios between the number of detection and that of upper limits.
- [T2LSPhotoZTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LSPhotoZTap.py): Query the NOIR DataLab service for photometric redshifts from the Legacy Survey.
- [T2LoadRedshift](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LoadRedshift.py): Add redshifts from external .csv.
- [T2MatchBTS](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2MatchBTS.py): Add information from the BTS explorer page.
- [T2MultiXgbClassifier](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2MultiXgbClassifier.py): For a range of xgboost classifier models, find a classification.
- [T2NedSNCosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2NedSNCosmo.py): Fits lightcurves using SNCOSMO (using SALT2 defaultwise) with redshift constrained by catalog matching results.
- [T2NedTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2NedTap.py): See also.
- [T2PS1ThumbExtCat](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbExtCat.py): Retrieve panstarrs images at datapoint location and for each tied extcat catalog matching result.
- [T2PS1ThumbNedSNCosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbNedSNCosmo.py): This state t2 unit is tied with the state T2 unit T2NedSNCosmo.
- [T2PS1ThumbNedTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbNedTap.py): This point t2 unit is tied with the point T2 unit T2NedTap.
- [T2PanStarrThumbPrint](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PanStarrThumbPrint.py): Retrieve panstarrs images at datapoint location and save these as compressed svg into the returned dict.
- [T2RunParsnip](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunParsnip.py): Gathers information and runs the parsnip model and classifier.
- [T2RunPossis](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunPossis.py): Load a POSSIS kilnova model and fit to a LightCurve object as process is called.
- [T2RunSncosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunSncosmo.py): Gathers information and runs Sncosmo.
- [T2RunSnoopy](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunSnoopy.py): Gathers information and runs snoopy.
- [T2RunTDE](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunTDE.py): Create a TDE model and fit to a LightCurve object as process is called.
- [T2TNSEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2TNSEval.py): Evalute whether a transient fulfills criteria for submission to TNS.
- [T2XgbClassifier](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2XgbClassifier.py): Load a series of xgboost classifier models (distinguished by number of detections) and return a classification.

### T3 units (react):
- [AstroColibriPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/AstroColibriPublisher.py): Publish results to AstroColibri.
- [ChannelSummaryPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ChannelSummaryPublisher.py): Create a json file with summary statistics for the channel.
- [CostCounter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/CostCounter.py): Derive metrics for the total cost, as parsed by the provided documents.
- [ElasticcClassPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ElasticcClassPublisher.py): This unit is intended to submit classifications to the DESC TOM db during the ELAsTICC LSST alert simulation.
- [HealpixCorrPlotter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/HealpixCorrPlotter.py): Compare healpix coordinate P-value with output from T2RunSncosmo..
- [HealpixTokenGenerator](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/HealpixTokenGenerator.py): Based on a URL to a Healpix map.
- [PlotLightcurveSample](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/PlotLightcurveSample.py): Unit plots results from lightcurve fitters (RunSncosmo, RunParsnip).
- [RandomMapGenerator](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RandomMapGenerator.py): Generate smoothed circular healpix probability values around a random coordinate..
- [RapidBase](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidBase.py): Trigger rapid reactions.
- [RapidLco](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidLco.py): Submit LCO triggers for candidates passing criteria..
- [RapidSedm](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidSedm.py): Select transients for rapid reactions.
- [ScoreSingleObject](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ScoreSingleObject.py): Calculate score based on how early a specific SN is detected.
- [ScoreTNSObjects](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ScoreTNSObjects.py): Calculate score based on detection time reported to TNS, if any..
- [SlackSummaryPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/SlackSummaryPublisher.py)
- [TNSTalker](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TNSTalker.py): Get TNS name if existing, and submit selected candidates.
- [TransientInfoPrinter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientInfoPrinter.py)
- [TransientTablePublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientTablePublisher.py): Construct a table based on selected T2 output values.
- [TransientViewDumper](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientViewDumper.py)
- [VOEventPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/VOEventPublisher.py): Unit for creating a VOEvent pased on T2output and transient LightCurve.

Commit message:

Tns24 (#63)
* add more info from t2 eval

Updated TNS submit methods.

New plot methods, merged from nuztf.

Updated poetry files.

remove unimplemented method

ruff noqa flags added

chore: ruff cleanup

Remove old TNS units.

clean test

After removing out of day tests, the github ruff test fails (works locally).

Also remove obsolute TNS submit routines.

mypy edits

chore: add ruff to pre-commit config

ruff check

...and correcting ruff changes so mypy still happy.

...and correcting ruff changes so mypy still happy.

type support for Pillow

Plot options for Colibri.

Pull wrt magdifflim as criteria.

Fixed bug in TNS resonse query.

* Allow digest redshift methods to be inherited.

* Activate TNS submission and reply reading.

* added T2KilonovaStats evaluation

* Filter for looking for stellar flares.

* Base unit for lightcurve fitters.

* Two bugs caused by potentially empty catalog entries.

* Units for demo linear fit and search for stellar outburts.

* Updates to new API for TNS and AColibri uploads.

* Remove debug prints.

* Format updates.

* Consistant unit naming and separated base and demo classes.

* rm old names.

* Ensure that a NamedSecret for Slack publishing is not required.

* Shift dependence from TNSMirrorSearcher to complements through TNSNames.

* PlotTransientLightcurves now works with T3 complement cutouts.

* SubmitTNS using complemented TNS ids when possibl.

* Ripped out TNS and cutout duplicated methods.

* refine first-sentence detection

---------

Co-authored-by: andimatter <hermydrea@web.de>
Co-authored-by: Jakob van Santen <jvansanten@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

<img align="left" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17532220/213287034-0209aa19-f8a1-418f-a325-7472510542cb.png" width="150" height="150"/>
<br>

# AMPEL-HU-astro
<br><br>


Contributed Ampel units from HU/DESY group
==========================================

## Installing

1. [Install poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation). If you install poetry with conda, be sure to install it in its own environment, e.g. `conda create -n poetry`.
2. `git clone https://github.com/AmpelProject/Ampel-HU-astro.git; cd Ampel-HU-astro`
3. Check your virtualenv setup with `poetry env info` (or `conda run -n poetry poetry env info` if using conda). The output should include:
   ```
   Virtualenv
   Python:         3.10.x
   ```
   If not, point poetry at an installation of Python 3.10 with (`conda run -n poetry)` `poetry env use PATH_TO_PYTHON_310`
4. (`conda run -n poetry`) `poetry install -E "ztf sncosmo extcats notebook"`
5. `cd notebooks`
6. (`conda run -n poetry`) `poetry run jupyter notebook`

This will allow a number of Demo / access / development notebooks to be run. Note that most of them
requires an access token if data is to be retrieved.

## Provided units

<!-- The following are extracted from the docstrings; do not edit by hand -->
<!-- AUTOGENERATED CONTENT, do not edit below this line -->

### T0 units (alert filters):
- [LensedTransientFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/LensedTransientFilter.py)
- [PredetectionFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/PredetectionFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter.
- [RandFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RandFilter.py)
- [RcfFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RcfFilter.py): Filter for the ZTF Redshift Completeness Factor program..
- [RedshiftCatalogFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/RedshiftCatalogFilter.py): Filter derived from DecentFilter designed to only accept transients located close to a galaxy in a catalog, and within redshift bounds.
- [SimpleDecentFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/SimpleDecentFilter.py): General-purpose filter devloped alongside DecentFilter but without use of external catalogs.
- [StellarFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/StellarFilter.py): a.k.a. as the IndecentFilter, i.e. an inversion of the DecentFilter mainly used for finding extragalactic objects.
- [TransientInClusterFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/TransientInClusterFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter, in addition selecting candidates with position compatible with that of nearby galaxy clusters..
- [XShooterFilter](ampel/contrib/hu/t0/XShooterFilter.py): Filter derived from the DecentFilter, in addition selecting very new transients which are visible from the South.

### T2 units (augment):
- [T2BayesianBlocks](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2BayesianBlocks.py): T2 unit for running a bayesian block search algorithm to highlight excess regions.
- [T2BrightSNProb](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2BrightSNProb.py): Derive a number of simple metrics describing the rise, peak and decline of a lc.
- [T2CatalogMatchLocal](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2CatalogMatchLocal.py): Cross matches the position of a transient to those of sources in a set of catalogs.
- [T2DemoLightcurveFitter](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2DemoLightcurveFitter.py): Demonstration class showing how methods of T2BaseLightcurveFitter can be used develop a specific classifier.
- [T2DigestRedshifts](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2DigestRedshifts.py): Compare potential matches from different T2 units providing redshifts.
- [T2DustEchoEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2DustEchoEval.py)
- [T2ElasticcRedshiftSampler](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2ElasticcRedshiftSampler.py): Parse the elasticc diaSource host information and returns a list of redshifts and weights.
- [T2ElasticcReport](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2ElasticcReport.py): Parse a series of T2 results from T2RunParsnip and T2XgbClassifier, and create combined classifications according to the taxonomy of https://github.com/LSSTDESC/elasticc/blob/main/taxonomy/taxonomy.ipynb.
- [T2FastDecliner](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2FastDecliner.py): Determine decline rate in two last obs.
- [T2GetLensSNParameters](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2GetLensSNParameters.py)
- [T2InfantCatalogEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2InfantCatalogEval.py): Evaluate whether a transient fulfills criteria for being a potentially infant (extragalactic) transient.
- [T2KilonovaEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2KilonovaEval.py): Evaluate whether a transient fulfills criteria for being a potential kilonova-like event.
- [T2KilonovaStats](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2KilonovaStats.py)
- [T2LCQuality](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LCQuality.py): determine the 'quality' of the light curve by computing ratios between the number of detection and that of upper limits.
- [T2LSPhotoZTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LSPhotoZTap.py): Query the NOIR DataLab service for photometric redshifts from the Legacy Survey.
- [T2LoadRedshift](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2LoadRedshift.py): Add redshifts from external .csv.
- [T2MatchBTS](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2MatchBTS.py): Add information from the BTS explorer page.
- [T2MultiXgbClassifier](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2MultiXgbClassifier.py): For a range of xgboost classifier models, find a classification.
- [T2NedSNCosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2NedSNCosmo.py): Fits lightcurves using SNCOSMO (using SALT2 defaultwise) with redshift constrained by catalog matching results.
- [T2NedTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2NedTap.py): See also: https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/tap/sync?QUERY=SELECT+*+FROM+TAP_SCHEMA.tables&REQUEST=doQuery&LANG=ADQL&FORMAT=text Export all NED: https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/tap/sync?QUERY=SELECT+*+FROM+NEDTAP.objdir&REQUEST=doQuery&LANG=ADQL&FORMAT=text.
- [T2PS1ThumbExtCat](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbExtCat.py): Retrieve panstarrs images at datapoint location and for each tied extcat catalog matching result.
- [T2PS1ThumbNedSNCosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbNedSNCosmo.py): This state t2 unit is tied with the state T2 unit T2NedSNCosmo.
- [T2PS1ThumbNedTap](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PS1ThumbNedTap.py): This point t2 unit is tied with the point T2 unit T2NedTap.
- [T2PanStarrThumbPrint](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2PanStarrThumbPrint.py): Retrieve panstarrs images at datapoint location and save these as compressed svg into the returned dict.
- [T2RunParsnip](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunParsnip.py): Gathers information and runs the parsnip model and classifier.
- [T2RunPossis](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunPossis.py): Load a POSSIS kilnova model and fit to a LightCurve object as process is called.
- [T2RunSncosmo](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunSncosmo.py): Gathers information and runs Sncosmo.
- [T2RunSnoopy](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunSnoopy.py): Gathers information and runs snoopy.
- [T2RunTDE](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2RunTDE.py): Create a TDE model and fit to a LightCurve object as process is called.
- [T2TNSEval](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2TNSEval.py): Evalute whether a transient fulfills criteria for submission to TNS.
- [T2XgbClassifier](ampel/contrib/hu/t2/T2XgbClassifier.py): Load a series of xgboost classifier models (distinguished by number of detections) and return a classification.

### T3 units (react):
- [AstroColibriPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/AstroColibriPublisher.py): Publish results to AstroColibri.
- [ChannelSummaryPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ChannelSummaryPublisher.py): Create a json file with summary statistics for the channel.
- [CostCounter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/CostCounter.py): Derive metrics for the total cost, as parsed by the provided documents.
- [ElasticcClassPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ElasticcClassPublisher.py): This unit is intended to submit classifications to the DESC TOM db during the ELAsTICC LSST alert simulation.
- [HealpixCorrPlotter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/HealpixCorrPlotter.py): Compare healpix coordinate P-value with output from T2RunSncosmo..
- [HealpixTokenGenerator](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/HealpixTokenGenerator.py): Based on a URL to a Healpix map.
- [PlotLightcurveSample](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/PlotLightcurveSample.py): Unit plots results from lightcurve fitters (RunSncosmo, RunParsnip).
- [PlotTransientLightcurves](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/PlotTransientLightcurves.py): Create a (pdf) plot summarizing lightcurves of candidates provided to the unit.
- [RandomMapGenerator](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RandomMapGenerator.py): Generate smoothed circular healpix probability values around a random coordinate..
- [RapidBase](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidBase.py): Trigger rapid reactions.
- [RapidLco](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidLco.py): Submit LCO triggers for candidates passing criteria..
- [RapidSedm](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/RapidSedm.py): Select transients for rapid reactions.
- [ScoreSingleObject](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ScoreSingleObject.py): Calculate score based on how early a specific SN is detected.
- [ScoreTNSObjects](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/ScoreTNSObjects.py): Calculate score based on detection time reported to TNS, if any..
- [SlackSummaryPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/SlackSummaryPublisher.py)
- [SubmitTNS](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/SubmitTNS.py): Submit candidates to TNS (unless already submitted).
- [TransientInfoPrinter](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientInfoPrinter.py)
- [TransientTablePublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientTablePublisher.py): Construct a table based on selected T2 output values.
- [TransientViewDumper](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/TransientViewDumper.py)
- [VOEventPublisher](ampel/contrib/hu/t3/VOEventPublisher.py): Unit for creating a VOEvent pased on T2output and transient LightCurve.
